There is one more complexity about variables
that we need to discuss. And this is the scopes
or the scoping of variables. This is all
about where are variables being defined
and where can i use them. In our boilerplate we
have these three functions. The functions are
defined by everything that is written inside
the curly brackets. So these curly brackets
represent a scope. Every function has its
own scope, the scope that surrounds our
functions is the so called "global scope". So if
i define a variable here: "let backgroundColor"
zero. Can now be used in all the scopes, that
come after our global scope. So i can for example
go into the background function, down
here and use the backgroundColor.
And if i save it now it works. And i can
change for example the backgroundColor to 100
and get a gray background. This is all nice,
because it's in the "global scope". Now i can
also modify it everywhere, for example in the
"setup" function. I could say background color
is zero.
In the beginning we define it as 100 and
then the code starts, running, set it to 0,
so it becomes black. But what happens, if i define
the backgroundColor in our "setup" function. let's
do this. So i say "let backgroundColor" and don't
do it up here. If i do this and run the sketch,
you will see that there's nothing showing up. So
there's probably an error. If i inspect the code
and go to the console, i can immediately see
that there is an error message saying "unknown
reference error backgroundColor is not defined"
and this is because we defined the backgroundColor
in the scope of the "setup" function. so the
"draw" function cannot access the scope of the
setup function. Always imagine you can go up any
level to access variables, but you cannot go down
or cannot get up and down again. But there's
an easy way to overcome this. For your initial
sketch ideas the easiest thing is to simply
define all your variables in the "global scope"
and for example, if you don't know yet what you
want to store inside this variable, simply let
it empty. You can just say "let backgroundColor"
and then later on, in the "setup" function you can
just say, now i know what backgroundColor should
be, so backgroundColor should be zero and then
"draw" can access the backgroundColor, because
the backgroundColor exists on the "global scope"
and can now be accessed and modified on
any other scope that comes after this.
If i save this, we can see that the sketch renders
again nicely. I will show some more in-depth
scoping elements, when we go into the
loops, because they represent another scope,
that goes a little further and so i will
talk again about scopes in a little bit.